From the New York Times, [music] I'm
Michael Boro. This is the daily.
[music]
>> Good morning. I'm Tom Hullman on the
borders are for President Trump. I'm
here on behalf of the president [music]
along with US commissioners.
>> A few days ago, the president's borders
are traveled to Minneapolis with a
simple message.
>> I didn't ask them to be immigration
officers. I'm asking them to be cops
working [music] with the cops and hope
to take criminal aliens off the street.
>> The faster local officials [music] there
cooperate with federal immigration
agents, the faster those [music] agents
will leave.
>> This is common sense cooperation that
allow us to draw down on the number of
people we have here. Yes, [music] I said
it. Draw down the number of people here
>> today. the history of why [music] that
kind of cooperation is so difficult to
pull off and potentially even illegal.
I turned to two of my colleagues, Hammed
Ali Aziz [music] and Ernesto Londano to
explain.
[music]
It's Monday, February [music] 2nd.
Huh? I wonder what you were thinking as
a longtime immigration reporter when you
heard Tom H. Homeman deliver the message
that he did to officials in Minneapolis,
essentially offering that draw down of
federal agents if local officials
cooperated and gave access.
I was thinking Tom H. Homeman was
uniquely fit to carry this message for
the Trump administration. You know, he
is somebody who has seen the entire
evolution of cooperation between local
law enforcement in liberal cities with
ICE, with the federal government. He's
really someone who was there at a time
when this was just normal practice at
ICE 15 years ago to work closely with
local law enforcement. Mhm.
>> And he's been there as it's faded away,
as it's become a political issue and
more and more local governments find it
unacceptable to work alongside ICE. And
so this is a really a battle that Tom
Hman has waged for a decade now. um not
only from his position as uh leading ICE
during that first Trump administration,
but continuously as well on Fox News and
testimony to Congress. This is really a
core issue for Tom Hman.
>> Well, what is that history that Homeman
seems to embody of this evolution from
cooperation to official non-ooperation
and and where does it start?
>> So 15 years ago during the Obama
administration, Tom H. Homeman was
leading deportation efforts. He was the
person overseeing all deportation
officers. And I think it's important
just to know that when someone gets
arrested in a local jail, your
fingerprints ping to a federal database
and that federal database goes to ICE.
So ICE is always aware when someone is
arrested. They have records on
individuals and they find out if someone
that they're looking for is in a county
jail. and and it doesn't matter if it's
in the San Francisco or in Alabama. And
so one of the key strategies for the
Obama administration was to utilize
jails and prisons to pick up people. And
at that time when it was less political
issue, ICE had the ability to request
local jails to hold on to people 48
hours after they're supposed to be
released. This made things really easy
for ICE because they could show up to a
jail and they could take multiple people
at once and they could arrest them, take
them to ICE detention and deport them.
So this made the entire process very
efficient and they really tapped into
local jails and prisons across the
United States. So it created a very
seamless pipeline from local law
enforcement to federal immigration
efforts and seemed to be working for
more or less both sides.
>> Exactly. And they were getting big
numbers.
>> Mr. Hman,
>> like you sir, I've carried a badge and
guns for 29 years. I think it's um I
care about the security of this country
and I think it's my job to protect the
security of this country and security of
our communities. So I think the biggest
threat is those that want to come to
this country and do harm.
>> And this is something that Homeman at
the time was testifying to in Congress.
You know, really speaking to the idea
that the Obama administration, their
approach, it makes sense.
>> I've been doing this for a long time and
there was a time when I was a street
agent. We just go out and arrest aliens
because they're here in violation of
law. And I'm enforcing immigration law,
but at the end of the day, what impact
did I make? At the same time I'm
arresting this person that's here
illegally but maybe hasn't committed
another crime, there's a child predator
walking out of state prison because we
didn't have uh presence in all the jails
across the country.
>> We're prioritizing the types of people
we're arresting. We're going after the
worst of the worst. And we're not just
going out there willy-nilly picking up
people.
>> We have a virtual presence in every jail
and when the alien gets arrested and
fingerprinted, we're going to find out
about that alien and we can take action
on him and remove him from the country.
>> This jail model really made sense to
him. the the strategy ICE has built on
prioritizing what we do on national
security threat aliens, aliens that are
threat to public safety, it makes sense
to me. It's the right thing to do. We're
built to remove 400,000 people. Let's
make that 400,000 count. So, I think
>> and so when does this start to change?
>> Well, you know, the Obama administration
became so effective at deportations that
President Obama started to be labeled
the deorter chief,
>> right? deorter and chief. Not in a good
way.
>> Exactly. Exactly. He was facing intense
criticism from immigrant advocates and
certain congressional officials who were
quite critical of this approach where
they were deporting hundreds of
thousands of people a year. And during
this time, there starts to become a
growing idea, a growing movement toward
the fact that cities should be a
sanctuary for immigrants, that they
should be protected from immigration
enforcement.
>> Right. All right. And just to jump in
because one of the very first episodes
of the Daily we ever did was about this
idea of a sanctuary city. This idea
literally emerges from church's
decisions to turn their sanctuaries into
a place that protects undocumented
immigrants. It's spread around the
country and eventually it becomes an
urban legal movement in places all over
the country.
>> Yeah, that's right. And it it becomes a
focus for the sanctuary movement to
ensure that local law enforcement is not
working with ICE and is not allowing ICE
to have that efficient funnel of people
from local lockups to detention centers
for ICE and ultimately deportations.
>> And just remind us why the sanctuary
movement ends up focusing on local law
enforcement, what the argument they're
making is. Yeah, there are several
arguments. One is the idea that
immigrants in a community will feel more
willing to come forward to local law
enforcement with tips, with reports of
crime, more willing to interact with
local law enforcement because they know
that local law enforcement is not
working with ICE. So that base level,
there's a belief that it makes
communities safer. And then local jails
are typically not given money, extra
money for interacting with ICE, for
holding people for ICE. So there is a
real cost to local jurisdictions. And
you know around that time when ICE is
getting these jails to hold people for a
longer period of time so that they could
come and pick them up, there were
several lawsuits uh in which individuals
who should not have been held longer for
ICE were locked up. And I think that
gave pause to some of these communities
as well. And just to explain, they're
facing lawsuits because those immigrants
who are being held for extra days in
order for ICE to be able to come and get
them are essentially facing an illegal
extra punishment on behalf of whatever
jurisdiction we're talking about just so
that ICE has a chance to deport them.
They're suing and sounds like in some
cases they're winning.
>> Yeah. And I think what these lawsuits
showed local jails and local politicians
was that when there's a mistake made by
ICE, you're going to be on the hook.
You're the one who's going to be sued.
You're the one who's going to face this
extra scrutiny. And I think it lent more
ammo to organizations like the ACLU to
point this out to say, you don't want to
get involved with this. You should try
to rid yourself of this potential
liability.
>> Right? Leave it to ICE. Let them do what
they need to do, but don't help them.
>> Exactly. You know, the immigration
system and the criminal justice system
should remain separate. And there's an
argument from activists and immigrant
advocates that some of these individuals
that ISIS picked up have been maybe not
even charged after they've been arrested
or the charges ultimately don't lead to
the conviction. And so these are
individuals who don't necessarily
uh meet the definition of a criminal,
but they've been arrested and thrown
into the criminal justice system and as
a result um they are being transferred
to ICE in a way that they should not be.
>> H So Ahmed, once this idea of
non-ooperation
settles in, what does that look like and
how broad does it become? You know, it's
during this time toward the end of the
Obama administration where places like
California buck back at the idea of
holding people longer so that ICE can
come pick him up. So, you see the Obama
administration really try to figure out
a way, this is during the time when Tom
Hman's there, to work with these liberal
jurisdictions. So they come up with this
idea that, okay, you don't have to hold
on to somebody longer for us, but how
about you notify us 48 hours before
somebody's released from custody so that
we could be there at the jail and pick
them up?
>> All that liability, all this potential
lawsuits, hey, you don't have to worry
about that. Just give us a heads up
before someone's released and you don't
need to hold on to them longer. So some
low level of cooperation is still
happening.
>> Yeah. The federal government offers it
as an option, but then Donald Trump wins
the presidency on the basis of cracking
down on immigration and deporting many
immigrants. And so it becomes a cause
for many of these progressive cities to
limit even that level of collaboration.
During this time, California puts in
place an expansive sanctuary state
policy, really limiting, severely
limiting the cooperation and interaction
between local law enforcement and ICE.
And soon you start seeing cities and
jurisdictions across the country taking
up this idea of limiting any type of
cooperation with the federal government
and with ICE because it was seen as a
way of helping President Trump. So
basically at this point the door comes
down on any form of any cooperation.
>> Yeah. Becomes really limited. I mean,
the ability for a jail to provide the
release date information for an
immigrant that ICE wants became limited
for very specific type of violent
criminal, very serious criminal. And
that made life much more difficult for
people like Tom H. Home. Homeman, who by
the time Trump comes into office, he's
put in place to run ICE. and he really
makes California and this whole idea of
a sanctuary jurisdiction, a sanctuary
state a cause for him. He focuses on it
relentlessly.
>> Sanctuary cities, I think, in my
opinion, raise a serious officer safety
and community safety issue.
>> And much of the message during this time
is very similar to the message that
we're hearing now. For every person that
I can't arrest in a county jail in a
sanctuary city means that a law
enforcement officer has to knock on the
door of a home to arrest somebody that
has a criminal history when they could
have arrested him in the safety and
security and privacy of a county jail.
In June of 2017, he goes in front of
Congress and he tells them that the the
idea of sanctuary cities makes it less
safe for communities, not only by
releasing alleged criminals into the
communities, but making it harder for
ICE to find these people.
>> It's only a matter of time before when
the men and women of ICE don't go home
at night because they had to go arrest a
criminal alien in a home rather than
getting him in a county jail in a
sanctuary city. that does the sanctuary
cities is are are danger to the men and
women of ICE
>> and when they go into these communities
and they go to homes and they try to
make these arrests there's a greater
possibility of a violent confrontation
of people being in danger and on top of
that more people being arrested just for
being around some of the targets. He's
basically saying ICE and immigration
enforcement in general is at its worst
and it's most confrontational when we
don't get the access that we believe we
need to your jails in particular.
>> Yeah, exactly. But ultimately Trump
became harsher. his language became more
aggressive and these cities and these
jurisdictions really there was no
pathway for them to come back online and
work with ICE. It was seen as the only
way or one of the main ways for these
communities to protect their immigrants
uh from the onslaught that Trump was
bringing to them during that first Trump
administration and ultimately Homeman
and the administration's efforts to sue
California over this really expansive
unprecedented
statewide sanctuary policy that failed
and Homeman and ICE they weren't able to
get more access to jails, they they got
less.
>> So, by the time Tom H. Homeman ends up
in Minneapolis last week and is telling
local officials, just give us access to
your jails and everything will be
copacetic.
He knows full well, cuz he's lived
through the whole history of this that
that's not a simple thing. It's been
legally codified as unacceptable in
many, many places around the country.
>> Yeah. Exactly.
You know, H Homeman is well aware. He
knows that this idea of working closely
with ICE, allowing ICE into local jails
in Minneapolis is a political
non-starter. But he also recognizes that
the idea of allowing some cooperation,
some effort to work with ICE could
really be a way, an offramp for both
sides
>> to say that they won something in this
battle and now they can move on from
this [music] crisis.
>> Muhammad, thank you [music] very much.
Thank you for having me.
After the break, Ernesto Landono on how
Minneapolis is navigating the Trump
administration's latest demands for
cooperation.
We'll be right back.
Ernesto, you're in Minneapolis. It's
where you live.
talk to us about how these demands for
cooperation from Tom Hman and the
administration to leaders in Minneapolis
are playing out there on the ground.
Well, Tom Hman has been here for a
couple of days. He's met with the
governor, with the mayor of Minneapolis,
with the mayor of St. Paul, but
arguably, I think the most consequential
meeting he's had is one of the ones that
has drawn the least amount of attention.
He met with Henipin County Sheriff Dana
Wit. The reason this matters is that
Sheriff Wit oversees the largest jail in
the state and the only one that has a
clear-cut policy saying that they will
not cooperate with ICE. So if there's
one person in the state currently who
could as a matter of policy under her
authority, you know, kind of give the
administration a big win, a trophy, so
to speak, to, you know, walk away from
this immigration crackdown, it's Sheriff
Wit. And what's the story of this jail?
This jail that it sounds like Tom Hman
is very focused on and its non
relationship to immigration enforcement.
>> Yeah, this jail has a really interesting
story that really dovetales the broader
journey of the sanctuary movement in the
United States.
So, you know, if you rewind the tape a
little bit and go back to the Obama
years, the Henipin County Jail had a
policy where they actually allowed ICE
agents to keep a tiny little office in
the facility. It was like the equivalent
of a broom closet. Huh. And what the
sheriff here at the time did was he
allowed agents to interview immigrants
who were booked into the jail to assess
whether or not they were deportable and
to figure out whether or not ICE wanted
to grab them the moment that they were
no longer going to be in state custody.
>> That's really fascinating that that's so
handinand glove. That's a deep level of
coordination. [music]
>> That's right.
And sheriffs in Minnesota are elected
officials, so they have to run for
office and be responsive to what the
electorate is feeling and thinking about
these issues.
>> Mhm.
>> And in the 2018 election, the sheriff,
who had been in office for over a
decade, lost his race by a tiny margin.
And one of the issues that the guy who
beat him campaigned on was rescending
cooperation with ICE.
>> So we were in a moment where people were
outraged by the family separation policy
that the Trump administration had been
pursuing and immigration had become both
a very divisive and a very partisan
issue. So you have a new sheriff who
comes into office at this fraught
political time over immigration and over
a period of months wound down
cooperation with ICE initially by
kicking them out of the jail and
eventually by not notifying them when
immigrants who were subject to
deportation were booked or informing ICE
when individuals were going to be due
for release. So no more broom closet for
ICE basically.
>> Exactly. They were out. However, I think
it's important to remember that there
was still a significant amount of
cooperation with ICE. When you looked at
the state prison system, which as a
matter of both statute and policy, they
always notify ICE when an individual who
is serving time on a serious charge is
going to be released. And those
individuals are handed over to ICE in a
very kind of pragmatic and cooperative
style. You just call up the ICE agent,
let them know, be here at such and such
prison at 9:00 in the morning and here's
your guy from our custody to yours.
>> When it comes to other jails in the
state, it's been a little trickier. I
think it varies sheriff to sheriff just
how much effort and time they want to
put into cooperating with ICE. And in
the past, this issue has been legally
challenging for counties in the state.
There's been lawsuits in at least a
couple of jurisdictions that resulted in
payouts to immigrants after the courts
found that local jails had exceeded
their authority in detaining people at
ISIS request longer than they legally
had permission to do so.
>> Right. Hmed talked about this
phenomenon. It ends up being the case
that the jails and the communities where
these jails are located are on the hook
financially for those legal challenges
which becomes a real disincentive to
play ball.
>> That's right. But I think what you have
is a mix of sheriffs here, you know, in
suburban counties, in rural counties. I
would say, you know, most sheriffs
cooperate with ICE to some degree. The
one exception continues to be Henipin
County, which up to this point maintains
that they do not intend to work with ICE
in any way, shape, or form.
>> Well, talk about the position that this
Henipin County Sheriff is now in. She's
got the federal government in the form
of Tom Hman bearing down on her and
saying, "We're asking this one thing."
And I have to imagine in a sense they're
making her feel like she stands in the
way of ICE and Border Patrol drawing
down their numbers in Minneapolis
because she's standing there and saying,
"I won't give you this thing you want."
>> Yeah. Yeah, it's really interesting
because in the messaging from the Trump
administration, you know, they've gone
really hard after Governor Tim Walls,
after Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Fry, but
both of them have essentially said we
either already cooperated with ICE um as
it pertains to the governor and the
prison system and the mayor has no
oversight over jails. So, I think
everybody's starting to look at Dana
Wit, the sheriff, and say if there's one
person who could, you know, make a real
substantive move that might appease the
Trump administration, it's Dana,
>> right?
>> The problem though is, you know, here is
somebody who needs to be elected and be
responsive to her constituents.
Dana Wit got elected in the aftermath of
the George Floyd era, you know, where
the politics in Minneapolis and the
county, you know, really veered to the
left. And she's somebody who I think is
at heart a centrist in her political
philosophy. She's somebody who I think
is a pragmatist, but she sort of rode
the wave of anger that followed the
killing of George Floyd during a time
when people were really upset at the
Trump administration where immigrant
right groups had a lot of political
power. So if she were to make a move
that her constituents would see as her
having capitulated to the Trump
administration and essentially flinging
the doors to the jail open to ice, you
would assume that would be politically
damaging for her in this moment.
>> Mhm. So what has she said about what she
plans to do?
>> She has said very little publicly. She's
been very critical of the way
immigration agents have conducted
business over the past few weeks. You
know, they've killed two American
citizens here. These immigration rates
have been very chaotic and disruptive.
>> But Dana Wit so far has not really
inserted herself publicly at least into
this conversation about jails and
prisons. I've been trying to interview
her,
>> but she hasn't really been ready to come
out and engage and, you know, say
whether or not she's willing to,
>> you know, be the one who makes a bold
move as part of the standoff. The
readout she put out about her meeting
with Tom Hman was very short and, you
know, somewhat vague. She called their
conversation candid and constructive,
but she did not indicate in any way,
shape, or form that she's starting to
revisit her policy at the jail or that
there could be a deal on the table that
she's exploring. Just to understand
because you're mostly talking about the
political predicament that this sheriff
is in legally, even if she wanted to,
could sheriff wit cooperate with the
federal government and open up the jail?
>> So, it's my understanding that there's
kind of two overlapping things happening
here. One is at the county level policy
is set by county commissioners who are
also elected officials and they have a
separation ordinance as it pertains to
ICE cooperation but it you know
addresses kind of simple issues such as
the fact that county property and
parking lots can't be used by ICE agents
to stage their operations.
>> Mhm. When it comes to the jail, my
understanding is that Sheriff Witz could
unilaterally decide to change the
policy. For instance, to start providing
information to ICE or to open up a line
of communication between her office and
the local ICE agents and to start
heeding their requests for information
about when somebody's going to be
released. you know, she could
theoretically also decide to once again
open the jail to ICE agents and to allow
them kind of easy access. It is, as I
understand it, within her purview,
>> but politically, I think it'd be a
really difficult and conceivably
damaging move for a sheriff who I think
intends to run for reelection,
>> right? And the question would be if she
were to let ICE Border Patrol start
coordinating with the jail, to what end
exactly? Because at the end of the day,
what kind of assurances do any of these
local officials have in Minneapolis or
really anywhere in the country that if
they meet Tom Hman's demands and the
administration's demands, if they fling
open the doors to this jail, if they let
ICE back into a broom closet in the
corner and coordinate release and then
arrest and deportation, that then ICE
and Border Patrol agents would start to
leave the city or that their operations
would go back to being less
confrontational.
>> I mean, there's absolutely no guarantee
that if you make this gesture, if you
were to open Henipin County Jail to
them, that this would all go away. You
know, it's hard to overstate how little
trust exists currently between elected
officials in the state and the Trump
administration on these issues. This is
a state where people feel besieged by
the federal government. They feel that
this operation is really, really doing
serious damage to people's livelihoods.
It's resulted in two deaths already and
it's really strained long-standing
relationships between local and federal
law enforcement agencies.
>> Mhm.
>> But it also, you know, boils down to the
principle about these policies.
The reason some police departments and
the Henipin County Sheriff's Office have
[music] decided they don't want to be
involved in immigration stuff is because
they feel it erodess trust with the
community they serve.
So if they were to make a big concession
on this, they would be essentially
capitulating on a matter of principle
and they would be doing so with no
guarantee that this would subject them
to less pressure from the Trump
administration [music] or even less
immigration enforcement out in the
streets.
>> Well,
thank you very much. We appreciate it.
>> Thank [music] you, Michael.
Over the weekend, a federal judge
ordered the Trump [music] administration
to release a 5-year-old boy and his
father, [music] whose detention in
suburban Minneapolis a few weeks ago,
had spurred nationwide outrage. The
judge in the case called the detention
of the boy, [music] who was wearing a
Spider-Man backpack and an oversized
fluffy blue winter hat when he was
captured, unconstitutional
and [music] quote, the imposition of
cruelty.
We'll be right back. [music]
Here's what else you need to [music]
know today. In an ominous sign for
national Republicans, a Democrat
decisively won a major special election
in Texas over the weekend, carrying
[music] a district that President Trump
won by more than 17 points a little over
a year ago.
The Democrat [music] Taylor Ramett, a
local union leader and firsttime
candidate, trounced the Republican in
[clears throat] the race, conservative
activist Lee Wamans in an election for a
major state [music] senate seat around
the city of Fort Worth. Ramett's victory
came even after President Trump endorsed
his rival, [music] and it reinforced
Democrats growing confidence that their
chances of winning back control of the
House this fall remain high.
And the latest government release of
documents related to Jeffrey Epstein,
the single largest release to date,
sheds new [music] light on his
relationship with several of the
country's richest and most powerful men.
The emails show that Epstein exchanged
multiple messages with Elon Musk and had
invited [music] Musk to his compound in
the Virgin Islands. Another email
written by Epstein to [music] himself
claimed that Epstein had helped Bill
Gates have extrammarital sex. a claim
Gates denies. [music]
Several emails show that Epstein
connected the owner of the New York
Giants, Steve Tish, with several women
whom Epstein described in vulgar terms.
Finally, emails showed that Howard
Lutnik, now commerce secretary, planned
a visit to Epstein's island in 2012,
despite Lutnik previously claiming
[music] that he had severed all ties
with Epstein 7 years earlier.
Today's episode was produced [music] by
Anna Foley, Alex Stern, Ricky Nevetski,
and Mooj Zadei. [music]
It was edited by Michael Benois and Liz
O. Balen. Contains music by [music]
Rowan Misto, Alicia Baup, and Dan
Powell, and was engineered by Chris
[music] Wood.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Babaro.
See you [music] tomorrow.